2026 Initiative
& Referenda
Handbook
Initiatives & Referenda in Washington State



Content
Introduction ………………………………………………………………………………. 3

Initiatives …………………………………………………………………………………… 4

Referenda ………………………………………………………………………………..… 5

How to File ……………………………………………………………………………….… 6

Public Disclosure ………………………………………………………………………… 7

Processing an Initiative & Referenda ………………………………………..… 8

Ballot Title & Summary …………………………………………………………….… 9

Petition Sheets Requirements ………………………………………………….…10

Circulation of Petition Sheets …………………………………………….……..…12

Submitting Petition Sheets ……………………………………………….…………13

Fiscal Impact Statement …………………………………………………….……..…14

Validating Petition Signatures ………………………………………….……….…14

Certiﬁcation …………………………………………………………………….……….…15

Filing Checklist ………………………………………………………………….…………16

Frequently Asked Questions …………………………………………….…….……17

Assistance & Contact Information ………………………………………….……19




                                                            2
Initiatives & Referenda in Washington State



Introduction
In 1912, Washington became one of the ﬁrst states to adopt the initiative and referenda
process, thus securing the rights of citizens to make and remake their laws, and to provide
a check over the decisions of their Legislature.


Today, if Washingtonians are dissatisﬁed with certain laws or feel new laws are needed,
they can petition to place proposed legislation on the ballot. The process is termed
“Initiative” because the electorate can initiate legislation. The electorate can either place a
proposition directly on the ballot or it can submit the proposed law to the Legislature at the
regular legislative session allowing the elected representatives an opportunity to enact the
proposed legislation themselves instead of placing the measure on the ballot.


A Referenda allows citizens, through the petition process, to refer acts of the Legislature to
the ballot before they become law. The Referenda also permits the Legislature itself to
refer proposed legislation to the electorate for approval or rejection.


The Initiative and Referenda processes guarantee Washington’s electorate the right to
legislate. Sponsors of Initiative or Referenda measures must obtain a substantial number
of petition signatures from registered voters in order to certify their measures to the ballot
or to the Legislature.


Washington’s history has shown the Initiative and Referenda processes to be eﬀective in
protecting the people’s interests. In fact, many of our most signiﬁcant laws, such as our
public disclosure laws, were enacted by this process.




                                                                                             3
Initiatives & Referenda in Washington State



Initiatives
The initiative process is the direct power of the voters to enact new laws or change existing
laws. It allows the voters to place proposed legislation on the ballot. An initiative cannot be
used to amend the State Constitution. (Article XXIII – Amendments).


There are two types of Initiatives:

Initiatives to the People are submitted for a direct vote of the people. If enough valid
petition signatures are submitted, the measure will appear in the next state general
election ballot in November.

Initiatives to the Legislature are submitted to the Legislature at its regular session each
January, if enough valid petition signatures are submitted. Once the initiative is submitted
to the Legislature, they must take one of the following three actions:

   •   The Legislature may adopt the Initiative as proposed, and it becomes law without a
       vote of the people;
   •   The Legislature may reject or refuse to act on the proposed Initiative and the
       Initiative will then be placed on the ballot at the next state general election; or
   •   The Legislature may propose a diﬀerent measure dealing with the same subject and
       both measures will be placed on the next state general election ballot.


Who Can Propose an Initiative?

Any registered voter of Washington State, acting individually or on behalf of an
organization, may propose legislation to create a new state law or to amend or repeal an
existing state law.

                                        When to File

Initiatives to the People

   •   Filing starts 10 months before the state general election with signature petition
       sheets due four months before the state general election.


Initiatives to the Legislature

   •   Filing starts 10 months before the start of the next state legislative session with
       signatures due 10 days before the state legislative session starts.




                                                                                               4
Initiatives & Referenda in Washington State



Referenda
The primary purpose of the Referenda is to give voters an opportunity to approve or reject laws
either proposed or enacted by the Legislature in the last legislative session.

Sections of enacted laws with an emergency clause—those that are necessary for the
immediate preservation of the public peace, health or safety, and the support of state
government and its existing institutions—are exempt from the referenda process.


There are two types of Referenda:

        Referenda Measures

        Referenda Measures are ﬁled by a registered voter (the Sponsor) on laws or acts
        recently passed by the State Legislature and placed on the ballot by a Referenda
        petition. A referendum may be ﬁled on all or part of the law or act.

        Referenda Bills

        Referenda Bills are proposed laws referred to the voters by the State Legislature.


Who Can Propose a Referenda Measure?

Any registered voter of Washington State, acting individually or on behalf of an organization,
may by petition, demand a law passed by the Legislature be referred to the voters prior to
going into eﬀect (except sections with emergency clauses, which are exempt from the
referenda processes).


When Can a Referenda Be Filed?

Referenda signature petition sheets must be ﬁled no later than 90 days after the ﬁnal
adjournment of the legislative session at which the act or law at issue was passed. The
Referenda is then submitted at the next state general election.



 2026 Filing Periods
 Initiatives to the People: January 5, 2026, to July 2, 2026
 Initiatives to the Legislature: March 11, 2026, to December 31, 2026
 Referenda: March 12, 2026, to June 10, 2026
 *Not later than 90 days after final adjournment of the session in which the measure passed.

*These dates refer to fulﬁlling all required ﬁlings including the submission of the required signatures
necessary for a referendum to be certiﬁed.


                                                                                                      5
Initiatives & Referenda in Washington State



How to File
Filling a Proposed Initiative or Referenda Measure

Filings are made through the Secretary of States Elections online ﬁling portal system. All
correspondence from the Code Reviser, Attorney General and the Oﬃce of the Secretary of
State is sent directly to the Sponsor’s email address and to the Sponsor’s ﬁling portal
account. To start the ﬁling process, go to: https://www.sos.wa.gov/elections/initiatives-
referenda/ﬁling-initiative to create a Sponsor ﬁling account.


The Sponsors must:

   Create a Sponsor account in the ﬁling portal (multiple initiatives and referenda may be
    ﬁled under one sponsor account).
   When you create a ﬁling, the Sponsor will need to upload their signed aﬃdavit in PDF
    format for the proposed Initiative or referenda. The Sponsor can add co-sponsors to
    the ﬁling, but it is not required to have co-sponsors. A copy of the co-sponsor’s signed
    aﬃdavit in PDF formatting will be required as well and be aware that electronic
    signatures are not allowed on aﬃdavits.
   Upload the full text of the Initiative or a copy of the bill/act the referenda will be on, all
    in PDF format.
   Pay the ﬁling fee ($156.00) with either a Visa or MasterCard online with the rest of your
    ﬁling or by submitting a check by mail or cash in person. (WAC 434-379-005)


If you need to pay with a check, you can mail your payment to:

Oﬃce of the Secretary of State
Elections Division - Initiative Support
PO Box 40229
Olympia WA 98504-0237

If you need to pay cash in person, you would do so at the OSOS main oﬃce at:

The Secretary of States Oﬃce
416 Sid Snyder Ave SW
Olympia, WA


Note: To become a sponsor of an initiative or referenda you must be registered to vote in our
state (RCW 29A.72.010) and your ﬁling will not be processed until our oﬃce receives your signed
aﬃdavit, the text of your initiative or referenda and your ﬁling fee.




                                                                                                     6
Initiatives & Referenda in Washington State



Your Public Information and Public Disclosure
Register with the Public Disclosure Commission (PDC)


Voters approved Washington State’s Public Disclosure Law in 1972. This act authorizes the
PDC to administer the law and to develop rules and regulations to implement the laws
related to campaign ﬁnance.

Requirements under this law stipulate that any person, organization, or committee which
expects to receive funds or make expenditures in an eﬀort to support or oppose any
Initiative or Referenda must register with the PDC.

Sponsors of Initiatives and Referenda must register with the PDC and ﬁle a “Statement of
Organization” (RCW 42.17A.205). Sponsors of and Initiative or Referenda are also required
to ﬁle C1, C3 and C4 reports with the PDC if they accept contributions to support their
initiative, or if they raise or spend more than $5,000 on the initiative campaign or accept
more than $500 from one donor in support of your initiative. For more information see:
https://www.pdc.wa.gov/



Public Information

Sponsors should be aware their voter registration information will appear on the Oﬃce of
the Secretary of State’s website (https://www.sos.wa.gov/elections ) unless other public
contact information is provided on the Sponsor’s aﬃdavit. Lists of Initiative and Referenda
ﬁlings along with their Sponsor’s contact information is posted on the Oﬃce of the
Secretary of State’s web site and are routinely made available to the public, the news
media, and others.




                                                                                              7
Initiatives & Referenda in Washington State



Processing an Initiative
Once the Sponsor ﬁles an Initiative with the oﬃce of the Secretary of State and the aﬃdavit
and ﬁling fee payment have been conﬁrmed, we will send a copy of the initial text to the
oﬃce of the Code Reviser for review.

The Code Reviser has seven (7) working days, to perform the following:

• Review the draft of the text for technical errors and style;

• Advise the Sponsor of any potential conﬂicts between the proposal and existing laws, and;

• Return the proposal to the Sponsor with recommended changes and the Certiﬁcate of
Review. All changes suggested by the Code Reviser are advisory and are subject to approval
or dismissal by the Sponsor.


Submitting the Final Text

The Sponsor has ﬁfteen (15) working days from the initial ﬁling date to ﬁle the ﬁnal text of
their proposed initiative measure to the Oﬃce of the Secretary of State (RCW 29A.72.020)
done through the online system. The ﬁnal text of their proposed initiative measure must be
accompanied by the Code Reviser’s Certiﬁcate of Review. It is the Sponsors responsibility to
ensure the ﬁnal text of their measure is complete with all necessary changes or edits
before ﬁling. Once the ﬁnal text is submitted, the Sponsor can make no more changes to
their proposed initiative measure.

Once the Oﬃce of the Secretary of State receives the ﬁnal text of a proposed Initiative, the
Oﬃce of the Secretary of State will assign a serial number to the Initiative and forward the
Code Reviser’s Certiﬁcate of Review and the ﬁnal text of the Initiative to the oﬃce of the
Attorney General for formulation of the Ballot Title and Summary.



Processing a Referenda
Referenda do not go through a Code Reviser review. For a Referenda, the only text
summitted is a copy of the bill or act the Referenda is on, submitted at the time of initial
ﬁling. It is the Sponsor’s responsibility to ensure the text of the bill or act the Referenda is
on, matchs the text of the ﬁnal version the Legislature voted on and signed by the
Governor, or the Referenda will not be approved.

Once the Oﬃce of the Secretary of State receives and conﬁrms the aﬃdavit and ﬁling fee
payment of the Referenda, the Oﬃce of the Secretary of State will assign a serial number to
the Referenda and forward the text of the Referenda to the oﬃce of the Attorney General
for formulation of the Ballot Title and Summary.


                                                                                                   8
Initiatives & Referenda in Washington State



Assignment of Ballot Title and Summary
Upon receipt of the ﬁnal text of an Initiative or the text of the bill or act the Referenda is on,
the Attorney General has ﬁve (5) working days to formulate and return the ballot title and
summary to the Oﬃce of the Secretary of State and Sponsor. (RCW 29A.72.060 )

The Ballot Title will consist of three parts:

   Part I. A statement of the subject of the petition that is:

   •   No more than 10 words.
   •   Suﬃciently precise to give notice of the measure’s subject matter.
   •   Suﬃciently broad to reﬂect the subject of the measure.


   Part II. A concise description of the measure that is:

   •   No more than 30 words.
   •   A true and impartial description of the measure’s essential content.
   •   Phrased to clearly identify the proposition to be voted on.
   •   Without prejudice for or against the measure.


   Part III. A question in the format prescribed in RCW 29A.72.050



Ballot Measure Summary

The ballot measure summary written by the Attorney General’s Oﬃce will summarize the
Initiative or Referenda and will not be more than 75 words. Immediately after receiving the
ballot title and summary, the Oﬃce of the Secretary of State will post it on our Elections
website under “Current Initiatives & Referenda”.



Appellate Period & Court Challenge

Any person dissatisﬁed with either the ballot title or summary prepared by the Attorney
General’s oﬃce may ﬁle a challenge by petitioning the Thurston County Superior Court in
Olympia. The challenge must be ﬁled during the appellate period, within ﬁve (5) working
days of the Attorney General’s oﬃce submission of the ballot title and summary to the
Oﬃce of the Secretary of State, which is published to the SOS Elections website
https://www.sos.wa.gov/elections . The court is required to give priority to such challenges
and render a decision within ﬁve (5) days. The decision of the court is ﬁnal.




                                                                                                9
Initiatives & Referenda in Washington State



Petition Sheet Requirments
The Sponsor of an Initiative or Referenda measure is responsible for printing signature petition
sheets at their own expense and can be done so after the ballot title and summary is issued by the
Attorney General’s Oﬃce and the appellate period is over. The Oﬃce of the Secretary of State may
reject any petition that does not meet the statutory requirements of RCW 29A.72.170 and WAC 434-
379-008.

State law requires:

•   Petitions must be printed on sheets of good quality paper.
•   Petition sheets must not measure less than 11 inches in width and not less than 14 inches in
    length. (We recommend 11in x 17in)
•   Petition sheets submitted must all be the same size and format.
•   The following items must be printed on the front of each petition sheet:
    1. The oﬃcial ballot title and summary as prepared by the Attorney General’s oﬃce;
    2. The serial number assigned by the Oﬃce of the Secretary of State;
    3. The heading speciﬁed by RCW 29A.72.110 for Petitions to the Legislature, RCW 29A.72.120
        for Petitions to the People, or RCW 29A.72.130 for Referenda Petitions;
    4. Not more than 20 numbered lines, each with space for a voter’s signature, his/her printed
        name and the address, city, and county at which they are registered to vote; and
    5. The following warning, which must occupy not less than four (4) square inches:
        “Every person who signs this petition with any other than his or her true name, knowingly signs
        more than one of these petitions, signs this petition when he or she is not a legal voter or makes
        any false statement on this petition may be punished by ﬁne or imprisonment or both.”
    6. The following items must be printed on the back of each petition sheet.
          a. The full text of the measure.
          b. The following declaration by the signature gatherer as required by RCW 29A.72.110,
               RCW 29A.72.120 or RCW 29A.72.130 must be on the reverse side of every petition page.

“I,_____, swear or aﬃrm under penalty of law that I circulated this sheet of the foregoing petition, and that,
to the best of my knowledge, every person who signed this sheet of the foregoing petition knowingly and
without any compensation or promise of compensation willingly signed his or her true name and that the
information provided therewith is true and correct. I further acknowledge that under chapter 29A.84 RCW,
forgery of signatures on this petition constitutes a class C felony, and that oﬀering any consideration or
gratuity to any person to induce them to sign a petition is a gross misdemeanor, such violations being
punishable by ﬁne or imprisonment or both.”


Note: If the text of the measure is too long to ﬁt all of it on the back of the petition sheet, you can
print your petition sheet on one large sheet that is then folded like a newspaper to accommodate
the text of the measure. Stapling extra sheets to the petition sheet is not allowed (RCW 29A.72.100).




                                                                                                           10
Initiatives & Referenda in Washington State


Example Petition Sheet Templates and Instructions
Below you will ﬁnd an example petition template with instructions. Example Petition Sheets
Templates and instructions can be found at:



                   https://www.sos.wa.gov/elections




                                                                                       11
Initiatives & Referenda in Washington State



Circulation of Petition Sheets
Sponsors must notify the Oﬃce of the Secretary of State when signatures are being collected at least
three months prior to the submission deadline. This allows the Oﬃce of the Secretary of State time
to prepare suﬃcient staﬃng and supplies. Sponsors must also provide a sample template of the
petition (in Word format) before the petitions are submitted (WAC 434-379-009). State law
prescribes certain rules for collecting signatures. Failure by signature gatherers and/or signers to
adhere to these rules can result in criminal prosecution.


Any person soliciting signatures should be fully aware of the following petition
requirements:

   •   Only legally registered Washington voters are legally allowed to sign a petition.
   •   Signers should record, on the line with their signatures, the address at which they are
       registered to vote.
   •   Signers should print their names in the space provided to facilitate the validation of
       their signature.

Signature Requirements of Initiatives and Referenda Measures

The Washington State Constitution requires Initiative and Referenda measures to contain a
speciﬁed number of legal voter signatures to be certiﬁed for either the ballot or the Legislature.
Those speciﬁed numbers are as follows:

       • Initiatives – Petitions must include a number of legal voter signatures equal to or in
       excess of eight (8) percent of the total votes cast for the oﬃce of Governor at the last
       regular state gubernatorial election.

       • Referenda Measures – Petitions must include a number of legal voter signatures
       equal to or in excess of four (4) percent of the total votes cast for the oﬃce of
       Governor at the last regular state gubernatorial election. (Half the number of
       required signatures for an initiative.) NOTE: a percentage of petition signatures are
       normally found to be invalid due to duplication, nonregistration, or fraud, it is
       recommended that sponsors ﬁle as many signatures as possible. While no number of
       signatures can guarantee suﬃciency, an additional 20% - 25% “cushion” may prove
       suﬃcient to qualify the measure for the ballot, assuming the petition has a normal rate
       of invalidation.

                  Initiative Petition Signatures Required + 25% cushion = 386,000
                  Referenda Petition Signatures Required + 25% cushion = 193,000




                                                                                                  12
Initiatives & Referenda in Washington State


Submitting Initiative and Referenda Petition Sheets
An appointment to submit petitions sheets can only be made by the Sponsor of the
Initiative or Referenda once the minimum required signatures have been collected. The
appointment to submit petition sheets must be made at least two days in advance of your
desired drop-oﬀ day with the Oﬃce of the Secretary of State (WAC 434-379-009).
Scheduling at least two to three weeks in advance of submitting petition sheets is preferred
so we can insure we have enough staﬀ and supplies on hand.

All signed petition sheets must be returned by those collecting signatures to the Sponsor of
the Initiative or Referenda before the Sponsor’s drop-oﬀ appointment with the Oﬃce of the
Secretary of State. Once the petition sheets are accepted and ﬁled, additional petition
sheets may be submitted by the Sponsor until the applicable deadline established by
RCW 29A.72.160.

At the drop-oﬀ appointment, the staﬀ will count the boxes of sheets of petitions and give
the Sponsor a receipt for them. The petition sheets must clearly contain the minimum
number of legal voter signatures needed for certiﬁcation in order for the Oﬃce of the
Secretary of State to accept the Initiative measure or Referenda petition for signature
checking.

• The Oﬃce of the Secretary of State may reject petitions short of the minimum requirements.
• The Oﬃce of the Secretary of State may reject any petition not in the legally required form.


Note: Petitions that are submitted should be unfolded with any staples, rubber bands,
sticky-notes, clips, and any other objects removed from the petition sheets and organized
by size (if there are diﬀerent size petition sheets).

Petitions must be submitted in person by the Sponsor by the close of business (5:00 pm)
no later then the last business day in the speciﬁed period for submission of signatures.
Please contact the oﬃce of the Secretary of State Elections division, 360-902-4180, 800-448-
4881 or InitiativeSupport@sos.wa.gov to make your appointment and get directions for
where and when to drop-oﬀ.

Note: If a deadline falls on a Saturday, the oﬃce will be open on that Saturday for the
transaction of business from 8:00 am to 5:00 pm. If a deadline falls on an observed public
holiday the deadline will be the previous business day (if not also a Saturday).

The sponsor may appeal the Oﬃce of the Secretary of State’s rejection of an Initiative or
Referenda petition by ﬁling an action with the Thurston County Superior Court within ten days of
the rejection.




                                                                                                 13
Initiatives & Referenda in Washington State



Fiscal Impact Statement
Upon the Sponsor making an appointment to submit signatures, the Oﬃce of the Secretary
of State notiﬁes the Oﬃce of Financial Management to create a “Fiscal Impact Statement”
that will describe any projected increase or decrease in revenues, costs, expenditures, or
indebtedness that the state or local governments will experience if the ballot measure
were approved by state voters. (RCW 29A.72.025).

The Statement for ﬁscal impacts is issued to the Sponsor by the Secretary of State and
posted online on the OSOS website. Any challenge to the ﬁscal impact statement must be
done within 3 days of the Sponsor receiving the Statement from the Secretary of State, in
the Thurston County Superior Court. (Sec. 6, chapter 29A.72 RCW)


Validating Petition Signatures
Once the petition signatures are dropped oﬀ, the Oﬃce of the Secretary of State checks
petitions for duplicate signatures and the signers’ status as a legal Washington voter.
Petition checkers are trained by the Washington State Patrol to verify signatures
(RCW 29A.40.110 (3) & WAC 434-379-020). Only one signature per voter counts.

State law allows that the Oﬃce of the Secretary of State may check a random sample of
signatures. The random sample process may only be used when the number of signatures
submitted is substantially in excess of the minimum needed to validate the measure.
Random sampling is used to project the proportion of invalid signatures on the initiative or
referenda petitions. (WAC 434-379-010)

If the random sampling indicates the number of valid signatures is equal to or in excess of
the minimum needed, the measure is certiﬁed.

If the random sampling indicates the number of valid signatures is less than the number
required, the Secretary of State will proceed to verify each signature not checked during
the sampling process. (The random sample process may not be used to reject an initiative
or referenda.)

Any citizen may appeal the Oﬃce of the Secretary of State’s ﬁnal determination of the
number of valid signatures by applying to the Thurston County Superior Court within ﬁve
days of the initial determination.

Both proponents and opponents of a measure may have designated observers present
during the check of signatures. The Oﬃce of the Secretary of State has the authority to
establish rules of conduct for observers and may limit the number of observers if
necessary. (RCW 29A.72.230). The Observer handbook and training video can be found on
our website here: https://www.sos.wa.gov/elections/initiatives-referenda/petition-observer-resources




                                                                                                   14
Initiatives & Referenda in Washington State


Certiﬁcation of Initiative and Referenda Measures

For Initiatives to the Legislature, a certiﬁed copy of the initiative ballot title and summary
is transmitted to the Legislature as soon as it convenes its regular session. The Oﬃce of the
Secretary of State then notiﬁes the Legislature of the results of the signature veriﬁcation
process once it has been completed. If suﬃcient valid signatures are validated, the
Legislature must take one of the following three actions:

   •   The Legislature may adopt the Initiative as proposed, and it becomes law without a
       vote of the people;
   •   The Legislature may reject or refuse to act on the proposed Initiative and the
       Initiative will then be placed on the ballot at the next state general election; or
   •   The Legislature may propose a diﬀerent measure dealing with the same subject and
       both measures will be placed on the next state general election ballot.


If suﬃcient valid signatures are validated on an Initiative to the People or a Referenda,
certiﬁcation containing the measure’s serial number and title is transmitted to each county
for placement on the next state general election ballot.




                                                                                           15
Initiatives & Referenda in Washington State



Filing Checklist
Are you ready to ﬁle?

   •   You are registered to vote in the State of Washington
   •   You have a scanned copy (in PDF format) of your signed aﬃdavit(s)
   •   You have the complete text of the Initiative or Referenda measure (in PDF format)
   •   You are ready to submit the ﬁling fee (Visa or MasterCard accepted)



This checklist is designed to assist sponsors with the Initiative and Referenda process


1. Create a sponsor’s online Initiative ﬁling account on the Oﬃce of the Secretary of State
   Elections website: https://www.sos.wa.gov/elections/initiatives-referenda/ﬁling-initiative

2. File your preliminary text (Initiatives) or for Referenda, ﬁle a copy of the bill or act you
   want your Referenda on, your signed aﬃdavit of sponsorship, and pay the ﬁling fee on
   the Oﬃce of the Secretary of State Petition Portal.

3. Register and ﬁle a “Statement of Organization” with the Public Disclosure Commission
   www.pdc.wa.gov after you ﬁle your Initiative or Referenda measure with the Oﬃce of
   the Secretary of State.

4. For Initiative ﬁlings only: Submit the ﬁnal text of the Initiative along with the “Certiﬁcate
   of Review” you received from the Code Reviser, with the Oﬃce of the Secretary of State,
   within 15 working days of initial ﬁling.

5. After the Attorney General’s oﬃce submits the Ballot Title and Summary for your
   proposed Initiative or Referenda measure, and after the 5-day appellate period has
   passed, if no one has submitted a court challenge to the ballot title and/or summary,
   you can submit your petition sheet template to initiativesupport@sos.wa.gov and print
   your petition sheets.

6. Circulate you petition among voters to collect signatures.

7. Make your appointment for submitting petition signatures (only after collecting the
   minimum number of required signatures).

8. Submit your petition sheets with the Elections division of the Oﬃce of the Secretary of
   State.

9. If your Initiative or Referenda gets certiﬁed to the ballot, you as the sponsor will submit
   the “For” statement for the Voters’ Pamphlet - see Guidelines for Ballot Measures.




                                                                                              16
Initiatives & Referenda in Washington State



Frequently Asked Questions
The Washington State Constitution reserves to the people the right to approve or reject certain
state laws through the Initiative or Referenda process. A registered voter, or group of voters,
desiring to qualify an Initiative or Referenda for the ballot must gather signatures on petitions
in order to do so.

The Oﬃce of the Secretary of State is frequently asked about issues speciﬁcally related to the
circulation of petitions and signature gathering. The following questions and answers are
designed to summarize these issues.




What if I’m against an Initiative or Referenda? Do I have the right to urge people not
to sign a petition?

   Yes, as a matter of freedom of speech. Please be aware of the applicable laws regarding
   petition gathering.

   This principle works both ways, of course. Neither side of an Initiative or Referenda
   campaign has the right to prevent the other from expressing opinions.




                                             *****


If I am asked to sign a petition, am I entitled to read the petition or the proposed
measure before I make up my mind?

   Yes. State law requires that petitions contain certain information, including the full text of
   the measure. This includes a ballot title and summary, written by either the Attorney
   General or a Superior Court judge, and other required information. The full text is printed
   on the back of the petition. Sometimes petition circulators attach the petitions to clip
   boards in order to make them easier to sign or easier for the circulator to handle. You
   should feel free to read any part of the petition that you think is necessary in order for you
   to come to a decision on signing or not signing the petition, even if that means unfolding it
   or removing it from a clipboard.

                                               *****




                                                                                                 17
Initiatives & Referenda in Washington State


What are the rules regarding the collecting of signatures at shopping malls, retail
stores, etc.?

   Gathering signatures for ballot measure petitions is a constitutionally guaranteed
   practice in the State of Washington. However, the right does not extend to all
   commercial private property open to the public. For further information on this subject,
   you may wish to have your legal counsel review the principal Washington court
   decisions on the subject:


      •   Fred Meyer Stores, INC v. Citizen Solutions, INC (2011)
      •   Fred Meyer Stores, INC v. National Petition Management, INC (2010)
      •   Initiative 172 v. Western Washington Fair Association (1997)
      •   Waremart Inc. v. Progressive Campaigns, Inc (1999)
      •   Southcenter Joint Venture v. National Democratic Policy Committee (1989)
      •   Alderwood Associates v. Washington Environmental Council (1981)


   The courts’ decisions depended on several factors, but the most important factor was
   whether the business in question had a policy of permitting or welcoming non-
   commercial, community or political activities onto the property. The courts have
   characterized this as maintaining a policy of allowing charitable, civic and political
   groups to use designated "public service centers" on the property.



                                              *****

What role does the Oﬃce of the Secretary of State play in resolving these disputes?

   None. Disagreements between property owners and signature gatherers are civil
   disputes that can only be resolved by the courts. We urge aggrieved parties to consult
   their own attorneys, and we make clear any redress is a matter for the courts to decide.

                                              *****


Does the signature gatherer need to sign the declaration on the back of the petition?

   No. Due to an opinion published by the Attorney General's oﬃce in 2006, the Oﬃce of
   the Secretary of State does not require that the signature gatherer sign the declaration
   in order for the petition to be accepted. For more information, see AGO 2006 No. 13.




                                                                                            18
Initiatives & Referenda in Washington State



Assistance and Contact Information
This manual is designed to inform citizens about the initiative and referenda processes and
to serve as a basic road map to those who wish to exercise these important constitutional
rights. We recommend working with your own attorney to make sure you follow all
applicable laws and procedures as you go through the initiative and referenda process.




Further questions or requests should be directed to:

Initiative Support
Oﬃce of the Secretary of State
Elections Division
PO Box 40229
Olympia WA 98504-0237
Phone: (360) 902-4180
Email: InitiativeSupport@sos.wa.gov
Website: https://www.sos.wa.gov/elections




                                                                                        19
