Initiative Measure IL26-001

19

Argument for

Argument against

Vote Yes to Restore Parents’ Rights in Education
These rights include access to their child’s instructional
materials and student records, notice of medical services,
opt-outs from certain activities and instruction, and
immediate notification when law enforcement questions their
child or their child is removed from campus without parental
permission.

Vote No On Removing Commonsense Protections For
Child Abuse Victims
While most parents are loving, the sad reality is there were
117,000 reports of child abuse or neglect in WA in 2024
alone. This poorly written measure further endangers
vulnerable child abuse victims by requiring schools to
hand over sensitive information to parents under criminal
investigation for raping, abusing or otherwise harming their
own child. That’s why it’s opposed by law enforcement and
the WA Coalition Against Domestic Violence and Sexual
Assault.

Protecting Vulnerable Children
School staff remain mandatory reporters of suspected
child abuse or neglect. Privacy for vulnerable children
remains paramount. But safeguards designed for children
at risk should not become a default policy of withholding
information from all parents.
Support Families, Not Secrecy
Parents must give permission for schools to administer
medication, apply sunscreen, or take students on field
trips. Yet current policies allow schools to withhold critical
information when a child expresses a new gender identity
at school. These policies may require staff to conceal this
information from parents, even when doing so conflicts with
their conscience or professional judgment. Opponents call
sharing this information with parents “outing” even when
significant changes to a minor’s school life may already
be known to classmates, teachers, and staff. Deliberately
excluding parents treats them as inherently unsafe without
an individualized assessment. This undermines the vital
parent-child relationship and denies families the opportunity
to navigate consequential questions about health and wellbeing together.
Restore Trust in Washington Schools
Schools are essential partners in a child’s educational
success, while parents are responsible for raising their
children. Respecting these distinct roles is essential to
restoring trust. Vote yes.

Rebuttal of argument against
Don’t be misled. IL26-001 expressly states that schools
“shall not be required to release” mental health counseling
records when a parent is the target of a child abuse or
neglect investigation; requires “immediate notification” if a
criminal action is deemed committed against or by their child;
and contains zero mandates placing students in danger. The
measure preserves safeguards while ensuring parents receive
consequential information about their children. Vote yes.

Written by
Travis Reep, Public School Elementary Teacher, Elected

Union Representative; Alesha Perkins, Parent and Education
Advocate, Independent Writer; Peter Rosenkranz, M.Ed.,
Superintendent, La Center School District; Tony Harris,
Public School Science/STEM Teacher, Elected Union
Representative; Amy Sousa, M.A. in Depth Psychology,
Women’s Rights Advocate; Jess Grant, Member, Democrats
for an Informed Approach to Gender
Contact: YESonParentsRights@gmail.com

Vote No On Delaying Parental Notification When Children
Are Crime Victims
If a student is the victim of a serious crime at school,
parents should not have to wait to find out. An unintended
consequence of IL26-001 is ending Washington’s legal
requirement that schools immediately notify parents when
the crime is reported. Experts say delayed notification only
adds to the child’s trauma and can prevent a child from
getting immediate help and support from loved ones and
professionals.
Vote No On Worsening The Teen Mental Health And
Homelessness Crisis
School nurses and counselors say this measure, bankrolled
by ultra-conservatives, discourages students facing domestic
violence, sexual abuse, or bullying from seeking help from
trusted teachers and school counselors, who would be
required to release students’ confidential records. It also
forces schools to knowingly put LGBTQ+ kids in increased
danger of violence and homelessness by outing them to
potentially abusive families.That’s why the WA State Nurses
Association, doctors, and school counselors oppose this
measure.

Rebuttal of argument for
IL26-001, bankrolled by ultra-conservative interests, is so
poorly written it would eliminate key existing parental rights.
It will repeal current state laws that guarantee parents’ rights
to immediate notification if their child is a victim of a crime
at school. It ends commonsense protections for child abuse
victims whose parents are accused of child abuse and
rape. That’s why it’s opposed by the WA Coalition Against
Domestic Violence and Sexual Assault. Vote No.

Written by
John Lovick, State Senator, Democrat, former Snohomish
County Sheriff; Roshelle Cleland, Washington Coalition
Against Domestic Violence and Sexual Assault; Justin Gill,
APRN, President, Washington State Nurses Association;
Karen Crowley, President, League of Women Voters of
Washington; Courtney Normand, Washington State Director,
Planned Parenthood Alliance Advocates; Jaime FinemanMcKinney, Nationally Board Certified School Counselor, Fife
Contact: NoHateInWAState.org/About-I-001;
info@nohateinwastate.org

