22

Initiative Measure IL26-638

Argument for

Argument against

Vote yes to protect fairness in girls’ sports.
Female athletes deserve fair opportunities to build
confidence, develop skills, and pursue goals. Let’s protect
those opportunities and affirm the hard-fought rights
established through Title IX in 1972, which expanded athletic
access for women by recognizing the necessity of the female
category. Washington currently allows males to compete
against girls, undermining opportunities generations before
them fought to secure.

Vote No To Protect All Girls
We all want fairness and safety in sports, but this poorly
written measure would require girls as young as 8 to undergo
intrusive medical sex certification as a new part of sports
physicals. It bans parents from using birth certificates.
Section 2 says doctors must subject girls to invasive
examinations of their “reproductive organs,” or expensive
genetic or hormone tests. These requirements apply to girls
only, boys are exempt.

Approving IL26-638 would align Washington with world
sports policies.
Federal law, the Women’s Tennis Association, World
Athletics, and the International Olympic Committee have all
adopted policies to protect eligibility for the female category.
In March 2026, the IOC president stated, “It is absolutely
clear that it would not be fair for biological males to compete
in the female category.”

Vote No Because It’s the Most Extreme Proposal of Its
Kind In The U.S
This initiative is bankrolled by an ultra-conservative megadonor to distract from rising costs, foster hate, and divide our
communities. It’s playing politics with kids, and putting girls
at risk.

Voting yes gives all students the opportunity to
participate in interscholastic sports.
Medical clearance is already required to participate safely.
Students would compete in the category that aligns with
their sex, verified during routine, medically necessary primary
care recommended by the American Academy of Pediatrics.
During a private, consented visit, a licensed medical
professional would verify sex based on the student’s birth
records, medical history and/or a standard, non-invasive
physical examination.
Washington can respect every student while recognizing
that sex-based athletic categories are necessary.
A female athlete should not lose a starting position, medal,
championship, or college recruiting opportunity because the
category created for her was not protected.

Vote No Because Doctors and Nurses Warn It Requires
Invasive Genital Exams On Girls
The WA State Nurses Association, Planned Parenthood
Alliance Advocates, and doctors warn this measure would
subject girls to medically unnecessary, embarrassing, and
potentially harmful genital exams. Today, students remain
fully clothed during sports physicals. Many of Washington’s
147,500 girls without a regular family doctor would be
subject to genital examinations by total strangers.
Vote No Because It Discourages Girls From Playing
Sports
Coaches and athletes say if we truly cared about girls’ sports
we would not put up more barriers for girls like invasive
genital exam requirements. This statewide blanket ban to
kick 5 - 10 trans girls off school teams will negatively impact
all girls, leaving no room for case by case decisions.

Rebuttal of argument against

Rebuttal of argument for

Don’t be misled by the opposition. IL26-638 doesn’t require
invasive or expensive exams. Standard primary pediatric
care already verifies sex; transferring that record to sports
is sufficient. Male athletic advantage is well established.
Washington competition results document at least 269
placements by male athletes competing in girls’ interscholastic
categories, including 74 firsts and 156 top-three finishes. The
initiative doesn’t ban anyone from sports. It simply requires
participation consistent with one’s sex. Vote yes.

IL26-638 is opposed by pediatricians, nurses, parents, and
sexual assault prevention groups because it discriminates
against girls and puts them at risk of harm. Today girls
in elementary, middle, and high school remain fully
clothed during sports physicals. Doctors say this poorly
written measure will subject girls to new invasive genital
examinations. This measure - the most extreme in the
nation - exempts boys, and bans parents from using birth
certificates. Vote No to protect girls.

Written by

Written by

Alesha Perkins, Parent and Education Advocate,
Independent Writer; Dori Whitford, High School Coach,
Track and Cross Country; Carol Brown, Olympic Bronze
Medalist, Rowing Board Member, ICONS; Erica Li, MD,
Board-Certified Pediatrician; Ahnaleigh Wilson, Student
Athlete, Girls’ Sports Advocate; Jess Grant, Member,
Democrats for an Informed Approach to Gender

Justin Gill, APRN, President, WA State Nurses Association;
Courtney Normand, WA State Director, Planned Parenthood
Alliance Advocates; Karen Crowley, President, League
of Women Voters of WA; Grace Shih, M.D., Family
Physician; Katie Johnson, RN, Retired School Nurse; Paul
Charbonneau, High School Girls’ Wrestling Coach

Contact: diagwash@gmail.com; www.di-ag.org

Contact: NoHateInWAState.org/About-I-638;
info@nohateinwastate.org

