                                        NICK BROWN
            ATTORNEY GENERAL OF WASHINGTON
                                 Administration Division
                 PO Box 40100 ● Olympia, WA 98504-0100 ● 360-753-6200


July 14, 2026


The Honorable Steve Hobbs
ATTN: Stuart Holmes
PO Box 40229
Olympia, WA 98504-0229

Re:    Ballot Title and Explanatory Statement for Initiative IL26-638

Dear Secretary Hobbs:

In accordance with RCW 29A.32.040 and RCW 29A.32.070, we supply herewith the Ballot Title and
Explanatory Statement for Initiative IL26-638. The ballot title for Initiative IL26-638 was previously
established, and is repeated here solely for convenience of reference.

                                            Ballot Title

Statement of Subject: Initiative Measure No. IL26-638 concerns participation in athletics at K-12
schools.

Concise Description: This measure would prohibit students it defines as “biologically male” from
competing in certain school athletic activities intended for female students only. It would require
verification of biological sex by students’ healthcare providers.

Should this measure be enacted into law? Yes [ ]         No [ ]


                                EXPLANATORY STATEMENT

                                 The Law as It Presently Exists

In Washington, school districts may offer extracurricular sports opportunities for students. Those
sports must be offered to all public school students without regard to sex, but public schools may
provide separate athletic teams based on sex. The Office of the Superintendent of Public
Instruction also creates regulations and guidelines to eliminate discrimination in sports for
students, and these regulations prohibit discrimination based on sex and gender identity.
                           ATTORNEY GENERAL OF WASHINGTON

July 14, 2026
Page 2


Public and private K-12 schools in Washington may allow individual athletes and teams to
compete against athletes and teams from other schools. For public schools, a school district’s
board of directors is responsible for regulating these athletic activities but may delegate that
responsibility to a nonprofit organization, such as the Washington Interscholastic Activities
Association (WIAA). A nonprofit organization that regulates interschool sports may not
discriminate on the basis of sex and must have written rules and policies regarding student
participation.

                       The Effect of the Proposed Measure if Approved

If approved, this initiative would change participation rules for interschool sports. This initiative
would, in its own language, prohibit “biologically male students from competing with and
against female students” on sports teams or in individual events that are designated for female
students only. This would generally prevent transgender girls from participating on girls’ sports
teams. This prohibition would affect public K-12 schools and also private schools that participate
in the WIAA or similar nonprofit organizations.

Students who want to participate in interschool sports teams or individual events that are
designated for female students only would have to provide a form that verifies the student’s
“biological sex.” That form must be signed by the student’s personal health care provider. The
verification would have to be based on the student’s reproductive anatomy, genetic makeup, or
normal endogenously produced testosterone levels. Students would thus have to undergo some
type of medical evaluation of their sex to participate in interschool sports designated for female
students only.


Sincerely,

s/Karl D. Smith
KARL D. SMITH
Deputy Solicitor General
360-664-2510
