14

Initiative Measure IP26-645

Argument for

Argument against

Vote Yes: Repeal the Income Tax, Make Olympia Keep Its
Word
Trust isn’t built by passing another tax, it’s earned by keeping
promises. Over the last 90 years, Washingtonians have
rejected an income tax ten times because they knew it would
threaten economic growth, discourage investment, and
reach beyond the people originally targeted. This year, the
Legislature enacted a new income tax anyway. I-645 restores
your right to decide.

Washington has one of the nation’s most upside-down tax
systems, where working and middle class families pay a
far higher tax rate than the wealthiest. I-645 would make that
worse. I-645 is fiscally irresponsible, slashing billions in
funding for education and healthcare, increasing taxes on
460,000 hard-working families, and jeopardizing tax cuts for
thousands of small businesses.

Taxes Always Expand
Supporters insist the tax is narrow, applying only to income
above $1 million. But lawmakers rejected opportunities to
permanently limit its reach, giving Olympia the ability to
expand the income tax to everyone. Before asking taxpayers
for more, they should demonstrate they can keep the
commitments they’ve already made.
A History of Broken Promises
80 times in the last five years Olympia has moved money
from dedicated accounts to the general fund. They’ve taken
money from state healthcare, flood control, pipeline safety,
school employees’ insurance, and others to backfill the
general fund. The capital gains tax was promised to support
early learning and childcare, yet those commitments were
delayed, reduced, or cancelled. First responders spent
careers relying on promises about their retirements, only to
watch the legislature raid their pensions to plug holes in the
general fund. Trust erodes when dedicated funding doesn’t
produce the results people were promised.

Vote No: Stop a Tax Break for the Wealthiest
Hedge fund mogul Brian Heywood has spent millions backing
I-645 because he wants a tax cut for the top 1%, while
sticking working and middle class families and small
businesses with higher costs. I-645 could mean higher taxes
for thousands of small businesses, force families to pay sales
tax for basic household items like diapers, and raise taxes for
460,000 Washington families – just so those making over a
million dollars in a year get a tax break.
Vote No: Stop Cuts to Schools, Healthcare, and Childcare
This measure cuts funding for K-12 public schools,
healthcare, childcare, and other important public services by
$13 billion over four years. That means larger class sizes,
higher costs for healthcare and childcare, and the elimination
of free school lunches for many children.
Vote No: Stop Higher Costs for Working Families
I-645 gives the wealthiest a big break while the rest of us face
higher healthcare and childcare costs and cuts to public
schools and higher education. Join Washington nurses,
teachers, and small business owners. Vote No on I-645.

Voting Yes repeals the new income tax before it begins,
preserves the Working Families Tax Credit, paid family leave,
and small-business tax relief. Voters have the final say.

Rebuttal of argument against

Rebuttal of argument for

The No campaign's claims are false. I-645 repeals the
income tax. Without I-645, Olympia can expand the income
tax to reach into your paycheck with the simple stroke of a
pen. No public vote and no permission required, any time
they want. This was never about schools or diapers, that's a
scare tactic. Washington has record revenues. An income tax
on anyone will become an income tax on everyone. Vote Yes.

The Millionaires Tax only applies to those making above one
million dollars per year. Any attempt to expand it to those of
us making under a million would be decided on the ballot voters always have the final say. I-645 blows a $13 billion
hole in the budget - don’t believe lies that we can keep tax
cuts for working families and small businesses but eliminate
the tax on the wealthy few that pays for them.

Written by

Written by

Chris Gildon, State Senator, Republican, Puyallup; Jesse
Proudman, Lifelong Washingtonian and Three-Time
Entrepreneur; Patti Mann, Retired Firefighter/Paramedic,
Seattle Fire Department; Viet Nguyen, Small Business
Owner, Independent, Seattle; Semmelle Abraham, Small
Business Owner; Julie H. Olds, Grandmother and Small
Business Owner

Janie White, President, Washington Education Association;
Matt Hipp, Small Business Owner, Halcyon Brewing
Company; Rosa Potts, Registered Nurse, Vancouver; April
Sims, President, Washington State Labor Council; Thom
Garrard, Retired classroom teacher, Edmonds School Board
Member; Lindsay Johnson, Planned Parenthood Advocates
of Greater Washington, Yakima

Contact: (360) 259-9771; chris@chrisgildon.com

Contact: (360) 545-3362; info@no645.com;
https://no645.com/

