                   PRELIMINARY PRINT

              Volume 606 U. S. Part 2
                             Pages 831–941




       OFFICIAL REPORTS
                                     OF


   THE SUPREME COURT
                                June 27, 2025


Page Proof Pending Publication


                    REBECCA A. WOMELDORF
                           reporter of decisions




    NOTICE: This preliminary print is subject to formal revision before
  the bound volume is published. Users are requested to notify the Reporter
  of Decisions, Supreme Court of the United States, Washington, D. C. 20543,
  pio@supremecourt.gov, of any typographical or other formal errors.
                        OCTOBER TERM, 2024                              831

                                 Syllabus


   TRUMP, PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES,
           et al. v. CASA, INC., et al.
               on application for partial stay
      No. 24A884. Argued May 15, 2025—Decided June 27, 2025*
Plaintiffs (respondents here)—individuals, organizations, and States—fled
  three separate suits to enjoin the implementation and enforcement of
  President Trump's Executive Order No. 14160. See Protecting the
  Meaning and Value of American Citizenship, 90 Fed. Reg. 8449. The
  Executive Order identifes circumstances in which a person born in the
  United States is not “subject to the jurisdiction thereof ” and is thus
  not recognized as an American citizen. The plaintiffs allege that the
  Executive Order violates the Fourteenth Amendment's Citizenship
  Clause, § 1, and § 201 of the Nationality Act of 1940. In each case, the
  District Court entered a “universal injunction”—an injunction barring
  executive offcials from applying the Executive Order to anyone, not
  just the plaintiffs. And in each case, the Court of Appeals denied the
  Government's request to stay the sweeping relief. The Government
Page Proof Pending Publication
  argues that the District Courts lacked equitable authority to impose
  universal relief and has fled three nearly identical emergency applica-
  tions seeking partial stays to limit the preliminary injunctions to the
  plaintiffs in each case. The applications do not raise—and thus the
  Court does not address—the question whether the Executive Order vio-
  lates the Citizenship Clause or Nationality Act. Instead, the issue the
  Court decides is whether, under the Judiciary Act of 1789, federal courts
  have equitable authority to issue universal injunctions.
Held: Universal injunctions likely exceed the equitable authority that Con-
 gress has given to federal courts. The Court grants the Government's
 applications for a partial stay of the injunctions entered below, but only
 to the extent that the injunctions are broader than necessary to provide
 complete relief to each plaintiff with standing to sue. Pp. 839–862.
    (a) The issue raised by these applications—whether Congress has
 granted federal courts authority to universally enjoin the enforcement
 of an executive order—plainly warrants this Court's review. On multi-
 ple occasions, and across administrations, the Solicitor General has

  *Together with No. 24A885, Trump, President of the United States,
et al. v. Washington et al., and No. 24A886, Trump, President of the
United States, et al. v. New Jersey et al., also on applications for partial
stays.
832                      TRUMP v. CASA, INC.

                                  Syllabus

 asked the Court to consider the propriety of this expansive remedy. As
 the number of universal injunctions has increased over the years, so too
 has the importance of the issue. Pp. 839–840.
    (b) The Government is likely to succeed on the merits of its claim that
 the District Courts lacked authority to issue universal injunctions. See
 Nken v. Holder, 556 U. S. 418, 434 (holding that for a stay application to
 be granted, the applicant must make a strong showing of likelihood of
 success on the merits). The issuance of a universal injunction can be
 justifed only as an exercise of equitable authority, yet Congress has
 granted federal courts no such power. The Judiciary Act of 1789 en-
 dowed federal courts with jurisdiction over “all suits . . . in equity,” § 11,
 1 Stat. 78, and still today, this statute “is what authorizes the federal
 courts to issue equitable remedies,” S. Bray & E. Sherwin, Remedies
 442. This Court has held that the statutory grant encompasses only
 those sorts of equitable remedies “traditionally accorded by courts of
 equity” at our country's inception. Grupo Mexicano de Desarrollo,
 S. A. v. Alliance Bond Fund, Inc., 527 U. S. 308, 319.
    Universal injunctions are not suffciently “analogous” to any relief
 available in the court of equity in England at the time of the founding.
 Id., at 318–319. Equity offered a mechanism for the Crown “to secure
 justice where it would not be secured by the ordinary and existing proc-
Page Proof Pending Publication
 esses of law.” G. Adams, The Origin of English Equity, 16 Colum.
 L. Rev. 87, 91. This “judicial prerogative of the King” thus extended
 to “those causes which the ordinary judges were incapable of determin-
 ing.” 1 J. Pomeroy, Equity Jurisprudence § 31, p. 27. Eventually, the
 Crown instituted the “practice of delegating the cases” that “came be-
 fore” the judicial prerogative “to the chancellor for his sole decision.”
 Id., § 34, at 28. The “general rule in Equity [was] that all persons mate-
 rially interested [in the suit were] to be made parties to it.” J. Story,
 Commentaries on Equity Pleadings § 72, p. 74. Injunctions were no
 exception; there were “sometimes suits to restrain the actions of partic-
 ular offcers against particular plaintiffs.” S. Bray, Multiple Chancel-
 lors: Reforming the National Injunction, 131 Harv. L. Rev. 417, 425
 (Bray, Multiple Chancellors). Of importance here, suits in equity were
 brought by and against individual parties, and the Chancellor's remedies
 were generally party specifc. See Iveson v. Harris, 7 Ves. 251, 257, 32
 Eng. Rep. 102, 104 (“[Y]ou cannot have an injunction except against a
 party to the suit”). In sum, under longstanding equity practice in Eng-
 land, there was no remedy “remotely like a national injunction.” Bray,
 Multiple Chancellors 425.
    Nor did founding-era courts of equity in the United States chart a
 different course. If anything, the approach traditionally taken by fed-
 eral courts cuts against the existence of such a sweeping remedy. Con-
                       Cite as: 606 U. S. 831 (2025)                      833

                                 Syllabus

 sider Scott v. Donald, where the plaintiff successfully challenged the
 constitutionality of a law on which state offcials had relied to confscate
 alcohol that the plaintiff kept for personal use. See 165 U. S. 107, 109
 (statement of case); id., at 111–112 (opinion of the Court). Although the
 plaintiff sought an injunction barring enforcement of the law against
 both himself and anyone “whose rights [were] infringed and threatened”
 by it, the Court permitted only relief benefting the named plaintiff.
 Id., at 115–117. In the ensuing decades, the Court consistently rebuffed
 requests for relief that extended beyond the parties. See, e. g., Perkins
 v. Lukens Steel Co., 310 U. S. 113, 123; Frothingham v. Mellon, decided
 with Massachusetts v. Mellon, 262 U. S. 447, 487–489.
    The Court's early refusals to grant relief to nonparties are consistent
 with the party-specifc principles that permeate the Court's understand-
 ing of equity. “[N]either declaratory nor injunctive relief,” the Court
 has said, “can directly interfere with enforcement of contested statutes
 or ordinances except with respect to the particular federal plaintiffs.”
 Doran v. Salem Inn, Inc., 422 U. S. 922, 931. In fact, universal injunc-
 tions were conspicuously nonexistent for most of the Nation's history.
 Their absence from 18th and 19th century equity practice settles the
 question of judicial authority.

Page Proof Pending Publication
    While “equity is fexible,” Grupo Mexicano, 527 U. S., at 322, the
 Court's precedent emphasizes that its “fexibility is confned within the
 broad boundaries of traditional equitable relief.” Ibid. Because the
 universal injunction lacks a historical pedigree, it falls outside the
 bounds of a federal court's equitable authority under the Judiciary Act.
 Pp. 841–847.
    (c) Respondents' counterarguments are unavailing. Pp. 847–856.
       (1) In an effort to satisfy Grupo Mexicano's historical test, re-
 spondents claim that universal injunctions are the modern equivalent of
 the decree resulting from a “bill of peace”—a form of group litigation in
 the Court of Chancery. Respondents contend that the existence of this
 historic equitable device means that federal courts have the equitable
 authority to issue universal injunctions under the Judiciary Act. The
 analogy, however, does not work. True, “bills of peace allowed [courts
 of equity] to adjudicate the rights of members of dispersed groups with-
 out formally joining them to a lawsuit through the usual procedures.”
 Arizona v. Biden, 40 F. 4th 375, 397 (Sutton, C. J., concurring). Unlike
 universal injunctions, however, which reach anyone affected by execu-
 tive or legislative action, bills of peace involved a “group [that] was small
 and cohesive.” Bray, Multiple Chancellors 426. And unlike universal
 injunctions, which bind only the parties to the suit, decrees resulting
 from a bill of peace “would bind all members of the group, whether they
