(Slip Opinion)              OCTOBER TERM, 2025                                       1

                                       Syllabus

         NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
       being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
       The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
       prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
       See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.


SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

                                       Syllabus

                            CASE v. MONTANA

       CERTIORARI TO THE SUPREME COURT OF MONTANA

   No. 24–624.      Argued October 15, 2025—Decided January 14, 2026


In Brigham City v. Stuart, 547 U. S. 398, 400, the Court held that the
  Fourth Amendment allows police officers to enter a home without a
  warrant if they have an “objectively reasonable basis for believing”
  that someone inside needs emergency assistance. In this case, Mon-
  tana police officers responded to the home of petitioner William Case
  after his ex-girlfriend called 9–1–1 to report that he was threatening
  suicide and may have shot himself. The officers knocked on the doors
  and yelled into an open window, but got no response. They could see
  an empty handgun holster and something that looked like a suicide
  note inside, and they ultimately decided to enter the home to render
  emergency aid. When one officer approached a bedroom closet in
  which Case was hiding, Case threw open the closet curtain while hold-
  ing an object that looked like a gun. Fearing that he was about to be
  shot, the officer shot and injured Case. An ambulance was called to
  take Case to the hospital, and officers found a handgun next to where
  Case had stood.
     Case was charged with assaulting a police officer. Case moved to
  suppress all evidence obtained from the home entry, arguing that the
  police violated the Fourth Amendment by entering without a warrant.
  The trial court denied the motion, and a jury found Case guilty. A
  divided Montana Supreme Court upheld the officers’ entry as lawful
  under Montana’s caretaker doctrine, rejecting the contention that an
  officer must have probable cause to believe that an occupant needs
  emergency aid.
Held: Brigham City’s objective reasonableness standard for warrantless
 home entries to render emergency aid applies without further gloss
 and was satisfied in this case. Pp. 5–11.
2                           CASE v. MONTANA

                                  Syllabus

       (a) “[S]earches and seizures inside a home without a warrant are
    presumptively unreasonable” under the Fourth Amendment. Brigham
    City, 547 U. S., at 403. But the “warrant requirement is subject to
    certain exceptions,” Lange v. California, 594 U. S. 295, 301, including
    the need to render emergency assistance. The Court first approved a
    warrantless home entry to render emergency assistance in Brigham
    City, holding that officers may enter when they have “an objectively
    reasonable basis for believing that an occupant is seriously injured or
    imminently threatened with such injury.” 547 U. S., at 400.
       The Montana Supreme Court’s opinion below strayed from that rule.
    Most important, the emergency-aid test incorporated in Montana’s
    caretaker doctrine evokes the Fourth Amendment standard of “reason-
    able suspicion” that applies to relatively non-invasive street stops. But
    Brigham City adopted a different standard for home entries.
       Case now urges the Court to understand Brigham City as sounding
    in probable cause, but the Court declines to put a new probable-cause
    spin onto the emergency-aid standard. Probable cause is “peculiarly
    related to criminal investigations,” Treasury Employees v. Von Raab,
    489 U. S. 656, 667, and that body of law would fit awkwardly, if at all,
    in the non-criminal, non-investigatory setting at issue here. Rather
    than strain to relate probable-cause decisions to emergency-aid situa-
    tions, Brigham City asked simply whether an officer had “an objec-
    tively reasonable basis for believing” that entry was direly needed to
    prevent or deal with serious harm. 547 U. S., at 400. Courts should
    assess the reasonableness of an emergency-aid entry on its own terms,
    rather than through the lens generally used to consider investigative
    activity. Pp. 5–9.
       (b) The officers here had an “objectively reasonable basis for believ-
    ing” that their entry was needed to prevent Case from ending his life.
    The information the officers obtained from Case’s ex-girlfriend, com-
    bined with their observations at the scene, suggested that Case may
    already have shot himself or would do so absent intervention. The of-
    ficers’ decision to enter his home to prevent that result was reasonable.
    Accordingly, the Court affirms the judgment (even though not all the
    reasoning) of the Montana Supreme Court. Pp. 9–11.
417 Mont. 354, 553 P. 3d 985, affirmed.

   KAGAN, J., delivered the opinion for a unanimous Court. SOTOMAYOR,
J., and GORSUCH, J., filed concurring opinions.
                        Cite as: 607 U. S. ____ (2026)                              1

                             Opinion of the Court

     NOTICE: This opinion is subject to formal revision before publication in the
     United States Reports. Readers are requested to notify the Reporter of
     Decisions, Supreme Court of the United States, Washington, D. C. 20543,
     pio@supremecourt.gov, of any typographical or other formal errors.


SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
                                   _________________

                                   No. 24–624
                                   _________________


WILLIAM TREVOR CASE, PETITIONER v. MONTANA
      ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE SUPREME COURT
                      OF MONTANA
                               [January 14, 2026]

   JUSTICE KAGAN delivered the opinion of the Court.
   In Brigham City v. Stuart, 547 U. S. 398, 400 (2006), this
Court held that police officers may enter a home without a
warrant if they have an “objectively reasonable basis for be-
lieving” that someone inside needs emergency assistance.
The question presented is whether that standard means
that officers must have “probable cause” for the intrusion,
as they typically would when investigating a crime. We
hold it does not. The probable-cause requirement is rooted
in, and derives its meaning from, the criminal context, and
we decline to transplant it to this different one. Brigham
City’s reasonableness standard means just what it says,
with no further gloss. And here it was satisfied because the
police had “an objectively reasonable basis for believing”
that a homeowner intended to take his own life and, indeed,
may already have shot himself.
                              I
   This case began with an alarming phone call—from peti-
tioner William Case to his ex-girlfriend J. H., both residents
of a small town in Montana. Case told J. H. on the call that
“he was going to kill himself.” App. 67 (testimony of J. H.).
Because Case sounded “erratic,” J. H. assumed he had been
2                     CASE v. MONTANA

                      Opinion of the Court

drinking. Ibid. She tried to talk Case out of committing
suicide, but “couldn’t reel him back”: With each passing mo-
ment, Case “became more methodical about what he was
going to do.” Id., at 68. Case said that he was “going to get
a note”—presumably meaning a suicide note, for J. H. or
others to find. Ibid. And then J. H. heard a “clicking”
sound, like the “cock[ing of] a gun.” Ibid. J. H. told Case
she was going to call the police, but that seemed only to an-
tagonize him: Case replied “he would shoot them all too.”
Id., at 69. Finally, J. H. heard “a pop” followed by “noth-
ing”—“just dead air.” Ibid. She “yelled [Case’s] name a few
times,” but got no response, leading her to think he had
“pulled the trigger.” Ibid. So she called 9–1–1 to report the
incident and drove as fast as she could to Case’s home.
   Three police officers, dispatched to do “a welfare check on
a suicidal male,” met J. H. outside the house. Id., at 104
(testimony of officer). They decided the situation was “very
serious,” based both on what J. H. told them about the call
and on what they already knew about Case. Id., at 75, 157.
The officers were aware that Case had a history of alcohol
abuse and mental-health issues; that he had previously
threatened suicide at the school where he worked; and that
he had once seemed to attempt “suicide-by-cop,” by con-
fronting the police in a way that was likely to provoke a le-
thal response. So the three officers requested that the chief
of police come to the scene. While waiting for him, they cir-
cled the house looking for signs of injury or danger. They
knocked on the doors and yelled into an open window, but
got no response. Shining their flashlights inside, they could
make out empty beer cans, an empty handgun holster, and
a notepad with writing on it, which they took to be the sui-
cide note Case had mentioned to J. H. At that point, how-
ever, they saw no sign of Case.
   Once the chief came, the officers conferred and decided to
enter the house “to render emergency aid.” Id., at 198. In
the best-case scenario, they hoped to “talk [Case] down” and
