(Slip Opinion)              OCTOBER TERM, 2025                                       1

                                       Syllabus

         NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
       being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
       The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
       prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
       See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.


SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

                                       Syllabus

          BOST ET AL. v. ILLINOIS STATE BOARD OF
                      ELECTIONS ET AL.

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
                THE SEVENTH CIRCUIT

    No. 24–568.     Argued October 8, 2025—Decided January 14, 2026


Illinois law requires election officials to count mail-in ballots postmarked
   or certified no later than election day and received within two weeks
   of election day. Congressman Michael Bost and two other political can-
   didates filed a lawsuit claiming that counting ballots received after
   election day violates federal law. They principally contended that do-
   ing so conflicts with 2 U. S. C. §7 and 3 U. S. C. §1, which set election
   day as the Tuesday following the first Monday in November. The dis-
   trict court dismissed the case, and the Seventh Circuit affirmed on the
   ground that petitioners lacked standing.
Held: As a candidate for office, Congressman Bost has standing to chal-
 lenge the rules that govern the counting of votes in his election. Pp. 3–
 10.
    (a) Under Article III of the Constitution, plaintiffs must have a “per-
 sonal stake” in a case to have standing to sue. FDA v. Alliance for
 Hippocratic Medicine, 602 U. S. 367, 379. An unlawful election rule
 can injure a candidate in several ways: It might cause him to lose the
 election, require him to expend additional resources, or decrease his
 vote share and damage his reputation. But winning, and doing so as
 inexpensively and decisively as possible, are not a candidate’s only in-
 terests in an election.
    Candidates also have an interest in a fair process. Candidates seek
 to represent the people, and their interest in that prize cannot be sev-
 ered from their interest in the electoral process. Win or lose, candi-
 dates suffer when the process departs from the law. The harm to can-
 didates from an unfair and inaccurate election is not common to all.
2            BOST v. ILLINOIS STATE BD. OF ELECTIONS

                                   Syllabus

    While voters also have a general interest in an accurate vote tally, a
    candidate’s interest differs in kind. Those who spend time and re-
    sources seeking to claim the right to voice the will of the people have
    “an undeniably different—and more particularized—interest” in
    knowing what that will is. Hotze v. Hudspeth, 16 F. 4th 1121, 1126
    (Oldham, J., dissenting).
       Rules that undermine the integrity of the electoral process also un-
    dermine the winner’s political legitimacy. The counting of unlawful
    votes—or discarding of lawful ones—erodes public confidence in elec-
    tion results and the elected representative. “[R]eputational harms”
    are classic Article III injuries. TransUnion LLC v. Ramirez, 594 U. S.
    413, 425. And they are particularly concrete for those whose very jobs
    depend on the support of the people. Pp. 3–6.
       (b) Candidates do not need to show a substantial risk that a rule will
    cause them to lose the election or prevent them from achieving a le-
    gally significant vote threshold in order to have standing. Requiring
    such a showing could channel many election disputes to shortly before
    election day or after. Only then will many candidates be able to predict
    with any certainty that a rule will be outcome determinative. Yet the
    Court has repeatedly emphasized that lower federal courts should or-
    dinarily not alter the election rules on the eve of an election. Such
    late-breaking, court-ordered rule changes can result in voter confusion
    and undermine confidence in the integrity of electoral processes. The
    democratic consequences can be worse if courts intervene only after
    votes have been counted. Counting first and ruling upon legality af-
    terwards is not a recipe for producing election results that have the
    public acceptance democratic stability requires.
       Premising standing on a candidate’s risk of election loss or failure to
    achieve a certain vote threshold would also convert Article III judges
    into political prognosticators and “invite[ ] findings on matters as to
    which neither judges nor anyone else can have any confidence.” Rucho
    v. Common Cause, 588 U. S. 684, 711 (internal quotation marks omit-
    ted). “[A]ccurately predicting electoral outcomes is not” a “simple” en-
    deavor. Id., at 712. And the limits of federal courts’ jurisdiction do not
    rest upon such “unstable ground outside judicial expertise.” Id., at
    713.
       Nor would requiring candidates to plead a substantial risk of harm
    to their vote share leave courts on any surer footing. Such an approach
    would force judges to assess whether an election rule is likely to disad-
    vantage a particular candidate—determinations judges are no better
    qualified to make than assessing a candidate’s likelihood of winning or
    losing. Candidates would also have to plead and prove that voters who
    take advantage of the challenged rule will favor their rivals, which
    may require divulging information about political vulnerabilities.
                      Cite as: 607 U. S. ___ (2026)                      3

                                Syllabus

  Faced with that prospect, many candidates are sure to wait until after
  votes are counted to sue.
    Article III does not require this result. Candidates have a concrete
  and particularized interest in the rules that govern the counting of
  votes in their elections, regardless whether those rules harm their elec-
  toral prospects or increase the cost of their campaigns. Their interest
  extends to the integrity of the election—and the democratic process by
  which they earn or lose the support of the people they seek to repre-
  sent. Pp. 6–10.
114 F. 4th 634, reversed and remanded.

   ROBERTS, C. J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which THOMAS,
ALITO, GORSUCH, and KAVANAUGH, JJ., joined. BARRETT, J., filed an opin-
ion concurring in the judgment, in which KAGAN, J., joined. JACKSON, J.,
filed a dissenting opinion, in which SOTOMAYOR, J., joined.
                        Cite as: 607 U. S. ____ (2026)                              1

                             Opinion of the Court

     NOTICE: This opinion is subject to formal revision before publication in the
     United States Reports. Readers are requested to notify the Reporter of
     Decisions, Supreme Court of the United States, Washington, D. C. 20543,
     pio@supremecourt.gov, of any typographical or other formal errors.


SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
                                   _________________

                                   No. 24–568
                                   _________________


MICHAEL J. BOST, ET AL., PETITIONERS v. ILLINOIS
     STATE BOARD OF ELECTIONS, ET AL.
 ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF
           APPEALS FOR THE SEVENTH CIRCUIT
                               [January 14, 2026]

  CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS delivered the opinion of the
Court.
  Three political candidates challenged Illinois’s procedure
for counting mail-in ballots received after election day. We
consider whether the candidates have standing to maintain
their suit.
                               I
  Illinois law requires election officials to count mail-in bal-
lots postmarked or certified no later than election day and
received within two weeks of election day. Ill. Comp. Stat.,
ch. 10, §§5/19–8(c), 5/18A–15(a) (West 2022). In May 2022,
Congressman Michael Bost and Presidential elector nomi-
nees Laura Pollastrini and Susan Sweeney (petitioners)
sued the Illinois State Board of Elections and its executive
director (respondents), claiming that counting ballots re-
ceived after election day violates federal law. They princi-
pally contended that doing so conflicts with 2 U. S. C. §7
and 3 U. S. C. §1, which set election day as the Tuesday fol-
lowing the first Monday in November.
