                   PRELIMINARY PRINT

              Volume 606 U. S. Part 2
                             Pages 522–655




       OFFICIAL REPORTS
                                     OF


   THE SUPREME COURT
                                June 27, 2025


Page Proof Pending Publication


                    REBECCA A. WOMELDORF
                           reporter of decisions




    NOTICE: This preliminary print is subject to formal revision before
  the bound volume is published. Users are requested to notify the Reporter
  of Decisions, Supreme Court of the United States, Washington, D. C. 20543,
  pio@supremecourt.gov, of any typographical or other formal errors.
522                     OCTOBER TERM, 2024

                                Syllabus


           MAHMOUD et al. v. TAYLOR et al.

certiorari to the united states court of appeals for
                 the fourth circuit
      No. 24–297. Argued April 22, 2025—Decided June 27, 2025
During the 2022–2023 school year, the Montgomery County Board of Edu-
 cation (Board) introduced a variety of “LGBTQ+-inclusive” texts into
 the public school curriculum. Those texts included fve “LGBTQ+-
 inclusive” storybooks approved for students in kindergarten through
 ffth grade, which have story lines focused on sexuality and gender.
 When parents in Montgomery County sought to have their children ex-
 cused from instruction involving those books, the Board initially com-
 promised with the parents by notifying them when the “LGBTQ+-
 inclusive” storybooks would be taught and permitting their children to
 be excused from the instruction. That compromise was consistent with
 the Board's “Guidelines for Respecting Religious Diversity,” which pro-
 fessed a commitment to making “reasonable accommodations” for the
 religious “beliefs and practices” of students. Less than a year after the
Page Proof Pending Publication
 Board introduced the books, however, it rescinded the parental opt out
 policy. Among other things, the Board said that it “could not accom-
 modate the growing number of opt out requests without causing sig-
 nifcant disruptions to the classroom environment.” App. to Pet. for
 Cert. 607a.
    The petitioners here are a group of individual parents and an unincor-
 porated association of other interested parties. The individual parents
 come from diverse religious backgrounds and hold sincere views on sex-
 uality and gender which they wish to pass on to their children. Faced
 with the Board's decision to rescind opt outs, petitioners fled a lawsuit
 in the United States District Court for the District of Maryland.
 Among other things, they asserted that the Board's no-opt-out policy
 infringed on parents' right to the free exercise of their religion. See
 Kennedy v. Bremerton School Dist., 597 U. S. 507, 524. They relied
 heavily on Wisconsin v. Yoder, 406 U. S. 205, in which the Court recog-
 nized that parents have a right “to direct the religious upbringing of
 their children” and that this right can be infringed by laws that pose “a
 very real threat of undermining” the religious beliefs and practices that
 parents wish to instill in their children. Id., at 218, 233. Petitioners
 sought a preliminary and permanent injunction “prohibiting the School
 Board from forcing [their] children and other students—over the objec-
 tion of their parents—to read, listen to, or discuss” the storybooks.
                       Cite as: 606 U. S. 522 (2025)                   523

                                 Syllabus

  App. to Pet. for Cert. 206a. The District Court denied relief, and a
  divided panel of the Fourth Circuit affrmed.
Held: Parents challenging the Board's introduction of the “LGBTQ+-inclu-
 sive” storybooks, along with its decision to withhold opt outs, are enti-
 tled to a preliminary injunction. Pp. 545–570.
    (a) The parents assert that the Board's introduction of the “LGBTQ+-
 inclusive” storybooks—combined with its decision to withhold notice
 and opt outs—unconstitutionally burdens their religious exercise. At
 this stage, the parents seek a preliminary injunction that would permit
 them to have their children excused from instruction related to the sto-
 rybooks while this lawsuit proceeds. To obtain that form of prelimi-
 nary relief, the parents must show that: they are likely to succeed on
 the merits; they are likely to suffer irreparable harm in the absence of
 preliminary relief; the balance of equities tips in their favor; and an
 injunction would be in the public interest. Winter v. Natural Re-
 sources Defense Council, Inc., 555 U. S. 7, 20. The parents have made
 such a showing. Pp. 545–546.
    (b) The parents are likely to succeed on their claim that the Board's
 policies unconstitutionally burden their religious exercise. The Court
 has “long recognized the rights of parents to direct `the religious
Page Proof Pending Publication
 upbringing' of their children.” Espinoza v. Montana Dept. of Rev-
 enue, 591 U. S. 464, 486 (quoting Yoder, 406 U. S., at 213–214). Those
 rights are violated by government policies that “substantially inter-
 fer[e] with the religious development” of children. Id., at 218.
 Pp. 546–555.
       (1) For many people of faith, there are few religious acts more im-
 portant than the religious education of their children. See Our Lady
 of Guadalupe School v. Morrissey-Berru, 591 U. S. 732, 754. And the
 practice of educating one's children in one's religious beliefs, like all
 religious acts and practices, receives a generous measure of constitu-
 tional protection. The Constitution protects, for example, a parent's
 decision to send his or her child to a private religious school instead of
 a public school. Pierce v. Society of Sisters, 268 U. S. 510, 532–535.
 And the Court has recognized limits on the government's ability to in-
 terfere with a student's religious upbringing in a public school setting.
 In West Virginia Bd. of Ed. v. Barnette, 319 U. S. 624, for example, the
 Court held that a policy requiring public school students to salute the
 fag could not be enforced against Jehovah's Witnesses—who consider
 the fag a “graven image”—consistent with the First Amendment.
    Barnette involved an egregious kind of direct coercion: a requirement
 that students make an affrmation contrary to their parents' religious
 beliefs. In Yoder, the Court held that the Free Exercise Clause also
524                     MAHMOUD v. TAYLOR

                                 Syllabus

  protects against policies that impose more subtle forms of interference
  with the religious upbringing of children. There, the Court considered
  a compulsory-education law that would place Amish children into “an
  environment hostile to Amish beliefs,” where they would face “pressure
  to conform” to contrary viewpoints and lifestyles. 406 U. S., at 211.
  The Court concluded that such a law “substantially interfer[ed] with the
  religious development of the Amish child” and therefore “carrie[d] with
  it precisely the kind of objective danger to the free exercise of religion
  that the First Amendment was designed to prevent.” Id., at 218.
  Pp. 546–550.
       (2) The Board's introduction of the “LGBTQ+-inclusive” story-
  books, combined with its decision to withhold notice to parents and to
  forbid opt outs, substantially interferes with the religious development
  of petitioners' children and imposes the kind of burden on religious exer-
  cise that Yoder found unacceptable. The books are unmistakably nor-
  mative. They are designed to present certain values and beliefs as
  things to be celebrated, and certain contrary values and beliefs as things
  to be rejected.
     Take, for example, the message sent by the books concerning same-
  sex marriage. Many Americans “advocate with utmost, sincere convic-
  tion that, by divine precepts, same-sex marriage should not be con-
Page Proof Pending Publication
  doned.” Obergefell v. Hodges, 576 U. S. 644, 679. That group includes
  each of the parents in this case. The storybooks, however, are designed
  to present the opposite viewpoint to young, impressionable children who
  are likely to accept without question any moral messages conveyed by
  their teacher's instruction. The storybooks present same-sex weddings
  as occasions for great celebration and suggest that the only rubric for
  determining whether a marriage is acceptable is whether the individuals
  concerned “love each other.”
     The storybooks similarly convey a normative message on the subjects
  of sex and gender. Many Americans, like the parents in this case, be-
  lieve that biological sex refects divine creation, that sex and gender are
  inseparable, and that children should be encouraged to accept their sex
  and to live accordingly. The storybooks, however, suggest that it is
  hurtful, and perhaps even hateful, to hold the view that gender is inex-
  tricably bound with biological sex.
     Like the compulsory high school education considered in Yoder, these
  books impose upon children a set of values and beliefs that are “hostile”
  to their parents' religious beliefs. 406 U. S., at 211. And the books
  exert upon children a psychological “pressure to conform” to their spe-
  cifc viewpoints. Ibid. The books therefore present the same kind of
  “objective danger to the free exercise of religion” that the Court identi-
  fed in Yoder. Id., at 218. Pp. 550–555.
