                   PRELIMINARY PRINT

              Volume 606 U. S. Part 1
                             Pages 419–460




       OFFICIAL REPORTS
                                     OF


   THE SUPREME COURT
                                June 26, 2025


Page Proof Pending Publication


                    REBECCA A. WOMELDORF
                           reporter of decisions




    NOTICE: This preliminary print is subject to formal revision before
  the bound volume is published. Users are requested to notify the Reporter
  of Decisions, Supreme Court of the United States, Washington, D. C. 20543,
  pio@supremecourt.gov, of any typographical or other formal errors.
                         OCTOBER TERM, 2024                              419

                                  Syllabus


                 HEWITT v. UNITED STATES
certiorari to the united states court of appeals for
                  the fth circuit
    No. 23–1002. Argued January 13, 2025—Decided June 26, 2025*
Before the First Step Act was enacted in 2018, federal judges were re-
  quired to sentence frst-time offenders convicted of violating 18 U. S. C.
  § 924(c)—a law that criminalizes possessing a frearm while committing
  other crimes—to “stacked” 25-year periods of incarceration. The First
  Step Act eliminated this harsh mandatory minimum penalty. Section
  403(b) of the Act also made its more lenient penalties partially retroac-
  tive. Specifcally, if a sentence “has not been imposed” upon an eligible
  § 924(c) offender as of the date of the First Step Act's enactment, the
  Act applies. The question presented here concerns an edge case: What
  penalties apply when a § 924(c) offender had been sentenced as of the
  Act's enactment, but that sentence was subsequently vacated, such that
  the offender must face a post-Act resentencing?
     In 2009, petitioners Tony Hewitt, Corey Duffey, and Jarvis Ross were
Page Proof Pending Publication
  convicted of multiple counts of bank robbery and conspiracy to commit
  bank robbery, along with corresponding § 924(c) offenses for use of a
  frearm during a crime of violence. Each petitioner received a manda-
  tory 5-year sentence for his frst § 924(c) count of conviction and, despite
  being frst-time offenders, each received 25-year mandatory sentences
  on every § 924(c) count beyond his frst. Thus, each petitioner's sen-
  tence exceeded 325 years. Petitioners successfully challenged some of
  their convictions on direct appeal, and the Fifth Circuit vacated petition-
  ers' sentences. In 2012, the District Court resentenced each petitioner
  to between 285 and 305 years on the counts that remained.
     In 2019, the Court held that the “crime of violence” defnition the
  Government routinely used to support some § 924(c) convictions was un-
  constitutionally vague. See United States v. Davis, 588 U. S. 445, 470.
  Because that holding potentially affected some of petitioners' remaining
  convictions, the Fifth Circuit granted petitioners authorization to fle a
  second or successive postconviction motion. The District Court then
  vacated the impacted § 924(c) convictions, as well as petitioners' sen-
  tences. When the District Court held resentencings for the remaining
  convictions, petitioners argued that the First Step Act's 5-year—not 25-
  year—mandatory minimum penalties applied. Petitioners argued they

   *Together with No. 23–1150, Duffey et al. v. United States, also on cer-
tiorari to the same court.
420                  HEWITT v. UNITED STATES

                                  Syllabus

  were entitled to retroactive application of the Act's more lenient penal-
  ties because a vacated prior sentence is not a sentence that “has . . .
  been imposed” for purposes of § 403(b). The District Court disagreed
  and resentenced petitioners under the pre-Act sentencing scheme, giv-
  ing them stacked 25-year mandatory minimums for each § 924(c) count
  of conviction beyond their frst. Petitioners thus each received sen-
  tences of 130 years or more.
     On appeal, petitioners and the Government agreed that the First Step
  Act should have applied at petitioners' resentencings. The Fifth Cir-
  cuit denied their joint request for vacatur. In that court's view, § 403(b)
  applies only “to defendants for whom `a sentence . . . ha[d] not been
  imposed' as of the enactment date.” 92 F. 4th 304, 310. Because each
  petitioner had been sentenced (twice) prior to the Act's enactment, the
  panel concluded that petitioners were not eligible for the First Step
  Act's more lenient mandatory minimums.
Held: The judgment is reversed, and the cases are remanded.
92 F. 4th 304, reversed and remanded.
     Justice Jackson delivered the opinion of the Court with respect to
  Parts I, II, and III, concluding that under § 403(b) of the First Step Act,
  a sentence “has . . . been imposed” for purposes of that provision if, and
Page Proof Pending Publication
  only if, the sentence is extant—i. e., has not been vacated. Thus, the
  Act's more lenient penalties apply to defendants whose previous § 924(c)
  sentences have been vacated and who need to be resentenced following
  the Act's enactment. Pp. 427–433.
     (a) The text of § 403(b) and the nature of vacatur support this conclu-
  sion. Congress employed the present-perfect tense, requiring evalua-
  tion of whether “a sentence . . . has . . . been imposed” upon the defend-
  ant, rather than the past-perfect tense that would exclude anyone
  upon whom a sentence “had” been imposed. The present-perfect
  tense can refer to “an act, state, or condition that is now completed” or
  “a past action that comes up to and touches the present” and thus con-
  veys that the event in question continues to be true or valid. The Chi-
  cago Manual of Style § 5.132, p. 268. When used in either sense, the
  present-perfect tense addresses whether something has continuing rele-
  vance to the present, not merely whether it occurred as a historical
  fact. If an event is merely a relic of history because it was voided by
  a subsequent action, the past-perfect (not the present-perfect) tense is
  usually the more appropriate verb choice. The fact that adjacent
  provisions of § 403 contain past-tense verbs only strengthens the conclu-
  sion that § 403(b)'s use of the present-perfect tense is meaningful.
  Pp. 427–431.
                       Cite as: 606 U. S. 419 (2025)                    421

                                 Syllabus

     (b) Background principles regarding the legal effect of vacatur con-
  frm that a sentence has been imposed for § 403(b) purposes only so long
  as it remains valid. When interpreting statutes, the Court recognizes
  that Congress legislates against the backdrop of certain unexpressed
  presumptions. One such presumption is that vacated court orders are
  void ab initio and thus lack any prospective legal effect. A criminal
  defendant whose conviction has been vacated, for example, is to be
  treated going forward as though he were never convicted. By opera-
  tion of legal fction, the law acts as though the previous conviction never
  occurred. Section 403(b) refects this commonsense understanding of
  background vacatur principles. Just as defendants with vacated prior
  felony convictions are not precluded from possessing weapons under the
  federal felon-in-possession ban, § 403(b) retroactivity does not exclude
  from its scope those whose prior sentences were vacated. By authoriz-
  ing retroactive application of the First Step Act's more lenient penalties
  on any eligible offender upon whom “a sentence . . . has not been
  imposed,” the text of § 403(b) indicates that only past sentences with
  continued validity preclude application of the Act's new penalties.
  Pp. 431–433.

  Jackson, J., delivered the opinion of the Court with respect to Parts I,
Page
II, and III, inProof        Pending
               which Roberts,                    Publication
                                C. J., and Sotomayor,   Kagan, and Gor-
such, JJ., joined, and an opinion with respect to Parts IV and V, in which
Sotomayor and Kagan, JJ., joined. Alito, J., fled a dissenting opinion,
in which Thomas, Kavanaugh, and Barrett, JJ., joined, post, p. 440.

   Michael B. Kimberly argued the cause for petitioners in
both cases. With him on the briefs for petitioner Hewitt
were Paul W. Hughes, Sarah P. Hogarth, Andrew A. Lyons-
Berg, Charles Seidell, Eugene R. Fidell, and Charles A.
Rothfeld. Jo-Ann Tamila Sagar, Neal Kumar Katyal, Mi-
chael J. West, Dana A. Raphael, Vivek Jampala, John Tor-
rey Hunter, and Kevin B. Ross fled briefs for petitioner Duf-
fey et al.
   Masha G. Hansford argued the cause for the United States
in both cases as respondent in support of petitioners. With
her on the briefs were Solicitor General Prelogar, Principal
Deputy Assistant Attorney General Argentieri, Deputy So-
licitor General Feigin, and Andrew C. Noll.
