                   PRELIMINARY PRINT

              Volume 606 U. S. Part 1
                             Pages 305–356




       OFFICIAL REPORTS
                                     OF


   THE SUPREME COURT
                                June 26, 2025


Page Proof Pending Publication


                    REBECCA A. WOMELDORF
                           reporter of decisions




    NOTICE: This preliminary print is subject to formal revision before
  the bound volume is published. Users are requested to notify the Reporter
  of Decisions, Supreme Court of the United States, Washington, D. C. 20543,
  pio@supremecourt.gov, of any typographical or other formal errors.
                        OCTOBER TERM, 2024                             305

                                 Syllabus


                GUTIERREZ v. SAENZ et al.

certiorari to the united states court of appeals for
                  the fth circuit
    No. 23–7809. Argued February 24, 2025—Decided June 26, 2025
In 1998, Texas charged Ruben Gutierrez with capital murder for his
  involvement in the killing of Escolastica Harrison. The State's theory
  at trial was that Gutierrez wielded one of the two screwdrivers used to
  stab Harrison to death in her mobile home. The jury convicted Gutier-
  rez of capital murder. At the sentencing phase of Gutierrez's trial, the
  jury was required to answer whether Texas proved beyond a reasonable
  doubt that Gutierrez “actually caused” Harrison's death or, if not, that
  he “intended to kill [her]” or “anticipated that a human life would be
  taken.” Tex. Code Crim. Proc. Ann., Art. 37.071(2)(b)(2). The jury an-
  swered yes, and Gutierrez was sentenced to death.
     For nearly 15 years, Gutierrez has sought DNA testing of evidence
  he claims would prove he was not in Harrison's home the night of the
  murder. Texas's Article 64 allows DNA testing where a “convicted per-
Page Proof Pending Publication
  son establishes by a preponderance of the evidence” that he “would not
  have been convicted if exculpatory results had been obtained through
  DNA testing,” among other criteria. Art. 64.03(a)(2). Invoking Arti-
  cle 64, Gutierrez twice moved in state court for DNA testing of untested
  crime scene evidence. The trial court denied his frst request in 2010,
  and the Texas Court of Criminal Appeals (TCCA) affrmed. The court
  reasoned that even if Gutierrez's DNA was not found on the tested
  items, that would not establish his innocence of capital murder because
  he would still be a party to the robbery that resulted in Harrison's
  death. The court concluded that Gutierrez could not use Article 64 to
  show he was wrongly sentenced to death unless he could also establish
  his innocence of the underlying crime. In 2019, Gutierrez again sought
  DNA testing, but Texas courts denied his motion. On appeal, the
  TCCA reiterated that DNA testing was not available to show only death
  penalty ineligibility.
     Gutierrez then fled suit in federal court under 42 U. S. C. § 1983
  against Luis Saenz, the district attorney who has custody of the untes-
  ted evidence. Gutierrez argued that Texas's DNA testing procedures
  violated his liberty interests in utilizing state postconviction proce-
  dures. The District Court agreed and granted declaratory relief, fnd-
  ing it fundamentally unfair that Texas gives prisoners the right to chal-
  lenge their death sentence through habeas petitions but prevents them
306                     GUTIERREZ v. SAENZ

                                 Syllabus

  from obtaining DNA testing to support those petitions unless they can
  establish innocence of the underlying crime. The Fifth Circuit vacated
  the District Court's judgment and held that Gutierrez lacked standing to
  bring his § 1983 suit, fnding that his claimed injury was not redressable
  because a declaratory judgment would be unlikely to cause the prosecu-
  tor to “reverse course and allow testing.” 93 F. 4th 267, 272.
Held: Gutierrez has standing to bring his § 1983 claim challenging Texas's
 postconviction DNA testing procedures under the Due Process Clause.
 Pp. 314–321.
    (a) Individuals convicted of crimes in state court “have a liberty in-
 terest in demonstrating [their] innocence with new evidence under state
 law.” District Attorney's Offce for Third Judicial Dist. v. Osborne,
 557 U. S. 52, 68. For that reason, a state-created right to postconviction
 procedures can sometimes create rights to other procedures essential to
 realizing the state-created right. In Skinner v. Switzer, 562 U. S. 521,
 the Court held that a Texas prisoner could fle a due process claim under
 § 1983 against a prosecutor where the prisoner alleged that the prosecu-
 tor's refusal to turn over evidence deprived him of his liberty interests
 in utilizing state procedures to obtain reversal of his conviction or to
 obtain a pardon or reduction of his sentence. The Court reasoned that,
Page Proof Pending Publication
 while the prisoner could not challenge in federal court the state court
 decisions denying his Article 64 motions, he could allege in a federal
 § 1983 action that Article 64 unconstitutionally prevented him from ob-
 taining such testing.
    The question of a state prisoner's standing to bring a due process
 claim against the custodian of his evidence was frst addressed in Reed
 v. Goertz, 598 U. S. 230, where the Court confronted another challenge
 to Texas's postconviction DNA testing law. Reed alleged, among other
 things, that Article 64's chain-of-custody requirement was unconstitu-
 tional and effectively prevented many individuals from obtaining DNA
 testing. The Court held that Reed had standing to pursue declaratory
 relief. First, Reed adequately alleged an injury: denial of access to the
 requested evidence. Second, the state prosecutor caused Reed's injury
 by denying access to the evidence. Finally, if a federal court concluded
 that Texas's postconviction DNA testing procedures violate due process,
 the state prosecutor's justifcation for denying DNA testing would be
 eliminated, thereby removing the barrier between Reed and the re-
 quested testing. The same is true here. Like Reed, Gutierrez alleges
 that the local prosecutor's denial of his DNA testing request deprived
 him of his liberty interests in utilizing state procedures to obtain an
 acquittal or sentence reduction. As in Reed, the declaratory judgment
 Gutierrez seeks would redress that injury by changing the legal status
                      Cite as: 606 U. S. 305 (2025)                      307

                                 Syllabus

 of the parties and eliminating the state prosecutor's allegedly unlawful
 justifcation for denying DNA testing. Pp. 314–316.
    (b) The Fifth Circuit recognized the clear parallels between this case
 and Reed but distinguished the cases, reasoning that the local prosecu-
 tor in this case was unlikely to allow testing even if a federal court
 declared that Texas may not deny DNA testing that would affect only
 the punishment stage. Respondents, too, argue that Gutierrez lacks
 standing because the District Court's reason for declaring part of Arti-
 cle 64 unconstitutional was only one of several independent state-law
 grounds supporting the prosecutor's decision to deny access to the evi-
 dence. But this attempt to distinguish Reed fails twice over.
    First, to the extent the Fifth Circuit based its assessment of redress-
 ability on the declaratory judgment the District Court later issued,
 rather than Gutierrez's complaint, it turned the Article III standing in-
 quiry on its head. Gutierrez's standing does not depend on the relief
 the District Court ultimately granted on the merits. The proper focus
 of the standing inquiry is the complaint, and Gutierrez's complaint chal-
 lenges not just Article 64's limitation to actual innocence claims, but also
 the other barriers Article 64 erects between Gutierrez and DNA testing.
 Second, and more fundamentally, the Fifth Circuit erred in transforming

Page Proof Pending Publication
 the redressability inquiry into a guess about whether a favorable court
 decision will ultimately result in the prosecutor turning over the DNA
 evidence. In Reed, the Court reasoned that, if a federal court concludes
 that Texas's postconviction DNA testing procedures violate due process,
 that court order would redress the injury by eliminating the state prose-
 cutor's reliance on Article 64 as a reason for denying DNA testing. The
 same is true here. A declaratory judgment in Gutierrez's favor would
 redress his injury by removing the allegedly unconstitutional barrier
 Article 64 erected between Gutierrez and the requested testing. The
 Court in Reed was unmoved by the prosecutor's assertion that a declara-
 tory judgment would not change his ultimate decision to turn over the
 evidence. The reason is simple: That a prosecutor might eventually
 fnd another reason to deny a prisoner's DNA testing request does not
 eliminate the prisoner's standing to argue that the cited reasons vio-
 lated his rights under the Due Process Clause. Pp. 316–320.
    (c) Respondents also assert that this case is now moot because the
 state prosecutor refused Gutierrez's DNA testing request even after the
 District Court issued the declaratory judgment. That claim fails, too.
 A procedural due process claim like Gutierrez's is not mooted by the
 defendant's mid-appeal promise that, regardless of the lawsuit's out-
 come, the ultimate result will remain the same. Holding otherwise
 would allow defendants to manufacture mootness by ensuring that, no
 matter what procedures a court requires them to employ, the same sub-
