(Slip Opinion)              OCTOBER TERM, 2025                                       1

                                       Syllabus

         NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
       being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
       The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
       prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
       See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.


SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

                                       Syllabus

                   BARRETT v. UNITED STATES

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
                 THE SECOND CIRCUIT

   No. 24–5774.      Argued October 7, 2025—Decided January 14, 2026
This case concerns the relationship between two provisions of 18 U. S. C.
  §924: subsection (c)(1)(A)(i), which criminalizes using, carrying, or pos-
  sessing a firearm in connection with a federal crime of violence or drug
  trafficking crime, and subsection (j), which prescribes different penal-
  ties—including, in certain circumstances, capital punishment—when
  “a violation of subsection (c)” causes death. The question presented is
  whether a single act that violates both provisions may yield two con-
  victions—one under each provision—or only one.
     The Second Circuit held that one such act may yield two convictions.
  The Second Circuit acknowledged that subsection (c)(1) and subsection
  (j) qualify as the same offense under the test in Blockburger v. United
  States, 284 U. S. 299. But it believed that, as construed in Lora v.
  United States, 599 U. S. 453, the two provisions are separate offenses
  for which Congress has clearly authorized cumulative punishments.
  Because the Second Circuit’s decision deepened a split among the
  Courts of Appeals, this Court granted certiorari.
Held: Congress did not clearly authorize convictions under both
 §§924(c)(1)(A)(i) and (j) for a single act that violates both provisions.
 One act that violates both provisions therefore may spawn only one
 conviction. The part of the Second Circuit’s judgment that held other-
 wise is reversed. Pp. 5–19.
    (a) When enacted, §924(c) “made it a discrete offense” to use or carry
 a firearm in connection with a predicate federal crime of violence or
 drug trafficking crime. Abbott v. United States, 562 U. S. 8, 12. A
 §924(c) violation triggers a mandatory minimum sentence of at least
 five years. Congress later added §924(j) to provide a different penalty
 scheme for §924(c) violations that cause death. Section 924(j) has no
2                     BARRETT v. UNITED STATES

                                   Syllabus

    mandatory minimums; it instead authorized significant maximum
    sentences, including the death penalty or life in prison when the un-
    derlying violation is murder. Pp. 5–8.
       (b) The question in this case is whether subsection (j) also increased
    the number of convictions (rather than just the maximum sentence)
    that can result from a fatal violation of §924(c)(1)(A)(i). The Court re-
    solves the question as a matter “of statutory construction,” because
    “whether punishments . . . are unconstitutionally multiple cannot be
    resolved without determining what punishments the Legislative
    Branch has authorized.” Whalen v. United States, 445 U. S. 684, 688.
    And the Court undertakes this exercise in statutory construction with
    a thumb on the scale in the form of the Blockburger presumption,
    which instructs that Congress ordinarily does not intend to punish the
    same offense under two different statutes. It is undisputed that
    §924(c)(1)(A)(i) and §924(j) define the same offense per Blockburger.
    But the Court has said that the Blockburger presumption can yield to
    a plainly expressed contrary intent. This case therefore turns on
    whether Congress plainly expressed an intent to overcome the Block-
    burger presumption by authorizing multiple convictions for one act
    that violates both §924(c)(1)(A)(i) and §924(j). To ascertain such in-
    tent, the Court turns to statutory text, structure, and (for those who
    accept its help) legislative history. Pp. 8–10.
       (c) The text of §924 suggests strongly, perhaps conclusively, that
    Congress did not disavow Blockburger here. Congress included Block-
    burger-surmounting language twice within subsection (c) itself: It
    mandated that a §924(c)(1) conviction must be “in addition to the pun-
    ishment provided for” the predicate, and it also mandated that a con-
    viction under §924(c)(5)—for using or carrying armor piercing ammu-
    nition—must be “in addition to the punishment provided for” the
    predicate “or conviction under” §924. The Court has elsewhere called
    such “in addition to” language “crystal clear” evidence of a legislature’s
    intent to overcome Blockburger. But Congress used no similar lan-
    guage with respect to the interplay between subsection (c)(1) and sub-
    section (j). Pp. 10–14.
          (1) The argument that subsection (c)’s consecutive-sentence man-
    date textually authorizes dual convictions misunderstands the in-
    quiry. Blockburger addresses the permissibility of multiple convic-
    tions, not just multiple sentences; the assumption underlying the
    Blockburger rule is that Congress ordinarily does not intend to punish
    the same offense under two different statutes, where punishment
    means a criminal conviction and not simply the imposition of sentence.
    Accordingly, §924(c)'s consecutive-sentence mandate simply speaks
    past the question in this case: whether one act may result in two con-
    victions.     Before the consecutive-sentence mandate gains any
                       Cite as: 607 U. S. ___ (2026)                       3

                                 Syllabus

  relevance, a court must first determine whether two punishments
  (convictions) may be imposed at all. Only if two convictions may coex-
  ist does a court consult the consecutive-sentence mandate to arrange
  properly the resulting sentences. Pp. 11–13.
       (2) The argument that subsection (c)(1) and subsection (j) have dif-
  ferent focuses and thus target different wrongs that may be punished
  cumulatively is equally unavailing. The conduct (or result) that differ-
  entiates a greater offense from its lesser included offenses will often
  introduce some new focus, and that reality cannot do much to overcome
  the Blockburger presumption if the presumption is to retain its force.
  Pp. 13–14.
     (d) The statute’s operation and structure provide no indication Con-
  gress expressed any will to overcome Blockburger. Lora answers any
  concern that defendants convicted of and sentenced under subsection
  (j) will be rewarded with more lenient sentences than those convicted
  of the less serious subsection (c)(1) offense. There the Court explained
  that subsection (j) eschews mandatory penalties in favor of sentencing
  flexibility and reflects the seriousness of the offense using a different
  approach than subsection (c)’s mandatory minimum penalties—by au-
  thorizing the death penalty for murder and the same harsh punish-
  ment that the Federal Criminal Code prescribes for other manslaugh-
  ters. If prosecutors fear that a subsection (j) sentence will dip below
  what subsection (c)(1)(A)(i) would otherwise guarantee, they are free
  to choose subsection (c)(1)(A)(i)’s low-end rigidity over subsection (j)’s
  high-end flexibility.
     Neither the physical separation in the U. S. Code between subsec-
  tion (c)(1) and subsection (j), nor the fact that subsection (j)’s sentenc-
  ing scheme operates without reference to subsection (c)’s, overcomes
  the Blockburger presumption. See Ball v. United States, 470 U. S. 856.
  If offenses share elements but have comprehensive, independently op-
  erating penalty schemes, that suggests Congress intended to place in
  front of prosecutors a menu, not a buffet.
     Any analogy to Garrett v. United States, 471 U. S. 773, in which the
  Court found Blockburger overcome even without express statutory lan-
  guage disclaiming the presumption, is inapt. Garrett involved a con-
  tinuing criminal enterprise alleged to have spanned more than five
  years, and the continuing nature of the offense played a decisive role
  in the case. Garrett distinguished the facts there from what is involved
  here: the classic relation of the lesser included offense to the greater
  offense, wherein the very same conduct violates two statutes. Pp. 15–
  19.
102 F. 4th 60, reversed in part and remanded.
4                   BARRETT v. UNITED STATES

                                 Syllabus

   JACKSON, J., delivered the opinion of the Court with respect to Parts I,
II, III, IV–A, and IV–B, and an opinion with respect to Part IV–C, in
which ROBERTS, C. J., and SOTOMAYOR and KAGAN, JJ., joined. GORSUCH,
J., filed an opinion concurring in part.
